---
layout: post
title: "Open science, or how it should be the default"
---

> Note: This is an opinion piece written for the Department of Nutritional
Sciences (University of Toronto) newsletter NutriNews. Link to the piece will be
put up after the newsletter is published.

Open source. Open access. Open data. You may or may not have heard these terms, 
but these all encompass 'open science'. So what are they and why are they
important?

Before we get into open science, it's important to go back to what modern
science is. Science is the process of coming up with an idea, collecting data to
test that idea, and comparing the data to the idea to see if reality matches the
idea.

However, science is increasingly become more difficult to do. Studies cost more,
take longer, and are more complicated, in addition to less funding available and
more societal pressure to produce impactful and relevant research. Science needs
to adapt to these changes, and the open science movement is one such adaptation.

Modern science is intrinsically a collaborative process. While light competition
is beneficial for all human activities, the type of competition usually seen in
business and industry is particularly harmful to science. In order to progress,
research teams need to understand what other groups are doing so that they may
replicate and expand on each others work. 

The challenges that we all currently face (climate change, prevention diseases) 
are massive and complicated. No individual scientist or research group can 
possibly hope tackle them alone and the only solution is to collaborate. Using
open science tools, researchers around the globe can work together to solve 
these problems. There are three main tools in open science: open access, open
source, and open data.

Open access is ensuring that any published scientific article is freely
available to the public, immediately. Currently, most journals charge a
subscription fee (and gain a massive profit) that can impede progress.
Interestingly, open access articles tend to also have higher citation rates, a
metric commonly used to judge scientists work and funding. This is an argument
for more scientists to use open access and yet it is still not the standard
among researchers.

Open source is providing the code used to analyze the data and present the
results in the journal article. This allows researchers to not only check to
make sure the code and analysis were correct, but it also allows researchers to
use that code to conduct their own analysis. This in turn makes research better
since more eyes are on the code and gets it published sooner because the code
isn't written from scratch. Open source software such as R or Python, two
commonly used languages in analyzing scientific data, have mechanisms in place
that allow easy sharing of code.

Open data is putting the data collected from a study online, available for use 
by the research community. This is particularly important for tackling epidemics
such as the Zika or influenza viruses. Other researchers working on the same
topic can use that data to help them better understand the problem.

As you probably noticed, the common thread between these three tools is that
everything is easily available, transparent, and encourages (re-)use. They
reduce the time it takes for other researchers to confirm recently published
findings, incorporate them into the current knowledge, and use that to help
inform or tackle pressing problems.

We as society are facing challenges that require an adaptation. The traditional
way of doing science is not enough to keep up with the current demands. We need
to evolve and using open science tools is a step in the right direction.
