---
layout: post
title: "The rise of R for statistical analysis"
---

> Note: This is an opinion piece written for the Department of Nutritional
Sciences (University of Toronto) newsletter NutriNews. Link to the piece will be
put up after the newsletter is published.

Like all scientific research, the foundation of nutritional sciences is the use
of statistics to determine if a scientific finding is likely due to chance. In
the past, studies were simple, software was rudimentary or non-existent, and
statistics could generally be done by hand. Now, a single study can generate
massive amounts of data and rapid technological advancement has created powerful
software and hardware. Scientists are making use of these changes to do more
complicated studies and use the software to run their statistics.

Not long ago, it was mainly private corporations who created and distributed 
proprietary (closed) statistical software. One such example is SAS, which is a
company as well as the software they sell. Scientists relied on these companies
to ensure that the statistics they ran were accurate and reliable, but at the
cost of a hefty price tag and restrictive licensing to use the software.

However, over the last decade and a half, open source software has exponentially
risen in popularity and use. Open source means any software where the code for
the software is publicly available to look at and improve, and is usually free
to use. You may not know this, but our economy, the web, and almost all
electronic gadgets and devices you use in your everyday life run on open source 
software. It is the engine that keeps all of modern human activity continuing
and functional.

One such open source statistical software is R. It has rapidly gained massive
traction within the scientific community because of it's powerful statistical 
capabilities and programming features. I personally use R for my research, as 
well as teach it. And while I may be a bit biased, I believe that more 
scientific research should be using open source software such as R rather than 
closed software (e.g. SAS, SPSS, etc) for several strong reasons. To keep things
short, I'll only list three reasons.

The first is that because it is open source, anyone is free to look over the 
code and verify that the results are accurate. With proprietary software, there
is no way to verify that the code correct. Instead, you have to trust the
corporations when they say it works. This goes against the scientific principles
of reproducibility and replication.

Second, anyone can contribute to or develop extensions for R. Unlike proprietary
software that is bound by corporate bureaucracy and policies, cutting edge
techniques can be distributed much sooner, which may or may not ever be 
developed in proprietary software. Because the vast majority of statisticians
globally use and contribute to R, advanced statistical techniques are available
in R long before companies can incorporate it into their product. Science is
about using the latest tools to understand and analyze research results, which
is a major advantage to using R over other software.

Lastly, R is free and will always be free. It is legally licensed so that it can
never be under closed, proprietary control. Because scientific funding has been
steadily declining, any way to reduce expenses should appeal to scientists so
that their funding can last longer. An argument made against R in this regard
is we can't trust the results because it is free and it doesn't have a company
behind it. The problem with this argument is that the warranty on the accuracy
of results is the same for *any* software, both closed and open: There is *no
warranty* that the results will be correct.

These three reasons alone are strong reasons to use R, but there is also a 
value-based reason: the values underlying open source match the values of
science itself. Modern science is about sharing (though we could get better at
it) and collaborating, with as little barriers as possible. Using R allows us as
researchers to fit with this value. Plus, R is just more fun to use!
